################################################################################
# This is 'ncm-lib-blockdevices.pod', a ncm-lib-blockdevices's file
################################################################################
#
# VERSION:    0.20.3, 26/03/09 11:18
# AUTHOR:     Tim Bell, Andras Horvath and Luis Fernando Muñoz
# MAINTAINER: Luis Fernando Muñoz
# LICENSE:    http://cern.ch/eu-datagrid/license.html
#
################################################################################
# Coding style: emulate <TAB> characters with 4 spaces, thanks!
################################################################################

=pod

=head1 SYNOPSIS

This is the Perl library for handling block devices and filesystems
from Quattor. It can be resumed in two classes: C<Filesystem> and
C<Blockdevices>


This document briefly describes the design and implementation of the
library. For details on how to model file systems and block devices in
Quattor, see
L<https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/FIOgroup/TsiCDBBlockDevices>.

=head1 The classes

There are two main classes on this library:

=over 4

=item * C<Filesystem>

A class that models and handles a filesystem. This is the only class
that should care of block device handling. External code just needs to
instantiate a C<Filesystem> and the resulting object will do all the
magic.

=item * C<Blockdevices>

An abstract class modelling any possible block device. This should be
used only by the C<Filesystem> class. If you have a new type of block
device, you should inherit from this class and provide the methods
listed below.

=back

Class diagrams might follow on a separate TWiki page.

Both class hierarchies provide methods for either directly handling
the file systems and block devices directly (via an NCM component) or
for writing the Kickstart and Bash code that may lead to the correct
set-up during an installation or a re-installation. Unless explicitly
stated, methods don't accept any arguments.

=head2 File systems

The C<Filesystem> class gives the basic interface to physically
creating file systems as well as their underlying block devices, no
matter how complex they can get.

There are three methods for public use on this class:

=over 4

=item * C<create_if_needed>

Creates the file system and any block devices it might need, if it
doesn't exist yet. If any block devices it might use already exist,
they will be re-used.

=item * C<remove_if_needed>

If the file system was created with the C<preserve> flag set to false
and the C<format> flag set to true, it will be destroyed and its block
devices will be removed from the system. Otherwise, nothing will
happen.

=item * C<new_from_fstab>

Creates a filesystem object from its /etc/fstab entry. The filesystem
object is created to remove the filesystem and its block device, so it
is created with "preserve" = 0 and "format = 1. It's a lightweight
version of _initialize.

It receives the line on /etc/fstab and the configuration object as its
arguments.

=item * C<should_print_ks>

Returns whether the filesystem should be defined at the Kickstart.

=item * C<print_ks>

Prints the Anaconda directives on the Kickstart so that the file
system is mounted on the correct place.

=item * C<del_pre_ks>

If the FS is not marked to be kept, it prints the Bash code for
destroying it as well as its underlying block devices. To be used
during the %pre phase of the KS.

=item * C<create_ks>

Prints the Bash code so that the block devices associated with the FS
get created. To be used during the %pre phase of the KS.

=item * C<format_ks>

Prints the Bash code so that the block device on which the FS resides
gets formatted. To be used during the %pre phase.

=back

=head2 Block devices

The C<Blockdevices> class gives the basic interface to any block device
that can be needed. The set of operations any class must provide is:

=over 4

=item * C<_initialize>

Returns a new object (no need for Perl blessing) of the appropriate
block device class. Its arguments are:

=over 4

=item * C<$cfg>

The configuration object for the node's profile.

=item * C<$path>

The Pan path of the object being created.

=back

=item * C<new_from_system>

Creates a blockdevice object from its path on the system (e.g:
/dev/sda1). It receives two arguments:

=over 4

=item * C<$dev>

The device path.

=item * C<$cfg>

The configuration object.

=back

=item * C<create>

Physically creates the block device. If the object is a partition, a
partition will be created on the node. It returns 0 on success.

=item * C<remove>

Removes the block device from the system.

=item * C<devexists>

Returns true if the block device exists already in the system.

=item * C<has_filesystem>

Returns true if the block device has already a file system on it.


=item * C<should_print_ks>

Returns true if the block device should be printed on a KS file. This
is, if all its underlying block devices lie on disks with MSDOS
partition tables.

=item * C<print_ks>

Prints the appropriate Anaconda directives so that the file systems on
top of this block device get correctly mounted.

=item * C<create_pre_ks>

Prints the Bash code for creating the block device. This includes
checking whether the block device already exists and skipping it if
that's the case.

=item * C<del_pre_ks>

Prints the Bash code for destroying the block device. This includes
skipping non-empty volume groups.

=back

=head2 Instantiating different blockdevices

A given block device may be used by another one. For instance, a
partition may be used by a software RAID, and that software RAID can
be used by a volume group which also contains a partition.

If your block device lies on top of another one, and that must be
decided at run time, then you need to call
C<NCM::BlockdevFactory::build> or
C<NCM::BlockdevFactory::build_from_dev>. Check the code, as it's
really simple.

=head2 Comments

Any other methods present on any modules but not documented here are
supposed to be private to the class.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/FIOgroup/TsiCDBBlockDevices>,
L<aii-ks(8)>, L<ncm-filesystems(8)>

=cut
